[MUSIC]
In this video, we're going to
look at a range of techniques for
transforming our data using grouping and
sorting.
Ron needs to create one more pivot
table showing the total investment in
renewable energy by year.
You'll notice, however we do not have
just a year, we actually have a date.
So the first thing we're going to look at
is working with dates in pivot tables.
Now, making sure we click some way in the
data were going to come to our Insert tab.
We're going to click PivotTable, and we're
going to put it in an existing location,
and that's going to be
our investment sheet.
And A 3 and OK.
Now we want to see our total amount,
some I'm just going to select Amount and
we want to see it by date, and
I'm going to select Date and
now something quite
interesting as happened.
What it has actually done is taken
those dates an group them and
I'll just expand this so you can see by
month, within quarter, within the year.
This didn't used to happen in
older versions of Excel and
it might not be something
you actually want.
So the first thing I'm going to do is show
you how we can switch the grouping off,
and then we'll look at how we can
apply a grouping of our own choice.
So clicking somewhere into the dates
were going to come up to our pivot table
analyze ribbon, and we're going to choose
ungroup and this will remove the grouping.
And now it's quite hard to
actually analyze the data, so
you'll probably find you need to add
some level of grouping to your dates.
And the grouping we would like is
actually a year, so we're going to select
one of the dates again, for dates and
numbers we choose group field.
These are all the units you could
group by, and you can use multiple.
So I could click on Years and
that will group by months and years.
If I click on Months to unselect
that would just give me years.
Let's have a look at how it looks with
the two, so I'm going to do months and
years and I'm going to say OK and
there's our group data.
Just to the left of the group field,
you see two little buttons,
a collapse field and expand field.
If I click the collapse you'll see
it collapses all the groups, and
if I expand it expands all the groups.
That's a quick way to expand and collapse,
but you can also do it manually.
So if I come to one of the little minus or
plus signs that will also allow me to
expand and collapse a particular group.
I don't actually want to have
the month though, so I could come back
to my group field or even easier,
I can come to my rose quadrants,
grab the date field, drop it off, and
now I've just got the year grouping.
And you can do something very
similar with numeric values.
So we had invoices that you
wanted to batch in hundreds,
you could use the group field for
that as well.
What we can look at next is how we
can create a custom grouping and
for this I'd like you to come
to your Capacity By Year pivot.
And we're going to collapse
our non renewable, so
we can just see the total non
renewable rather than the breakdown.
And what we're going to do now is add
a grouping to our renewable sources.
Some of these sources like
marine energy for example,
make up a very small
percentage of the capacity.
So what we'd like to do is actually
take our bioenergy, geothermal,
and marine and just group them
into a new category called other.
And we're going to do this
by selecting them first.
I'm going to click Bioenergy
call my control key down,
click Geothermal and Marine.
And then coming up to my group section,
I'm going to choose group selection.
What that has effectively done is
create another layer in the hierarchy,
so I still have my individual
main technologies, but
I now have another layer
called Main Technology2.
Where these three are grouped together.
Now I need to give this grouping a proper
name, some I'm going to call it Other.
And then I'm going to remove
Main Technology from my pivot field list,
and now I'm just looking
at Main Technology2,
which I could give a different name but
I'm quite happy with it.
So that was how we could create a custom
Grouping, which can be really useful.
Let's now look at sorting data in a pivot.
And for this one, we're going to
come to capacity by region, and
you'll notice when you create a pivot,
it automatically sorts by Roll label and
column label, but
this might not be what you want.
So for example,
let's say we wanted the largest capacity,
we wanted to sort by total capacity.
If I click into my grand total column and
come up to my data tab on my ribbon,
I can use all the standard sort tools, and
I'd like to sort this largest to smallest,
and you'll see it's
restarted the whole pivot.
If I wanted to get back
to my alphabetic sort,
I can just come back into my
role labels and click A to Z.
You also have the option to sort by row,
so if I click into the raw
data that I want to sort by and
click, my A-Z sort button,
you see I have the option to sort
left to right, which is handy,
but even more interesting is you
can create your own custom sort.
You can just specify where you
want each value to go, and
there are a few ways of doing this.
One that's very interesting is
if I decided I wanted Asia to be
down here instead,
I can actually just start by typing Asia,
press Enter and you'll see it's
actually popped Asia down here.
Probably more intuitive
is you can drag and drop.
And let's say I want North America
to be at the top of the list,
I'm going to select the row.
So, I've just come just to
the right of the 10, then,
click onto the green border that
surrounds it till I get my move icon.
And then, I can just click and drag.
So, you can reorganize your role labels or
your column labels to be
in any sequence you like.
If I remove region from the Rose quadrant,
and
then, re added,
It remembers my sought order.
Finally, there's one
very interesting option.
Which is not obvious, and
this is called sorting with a custom list,
and I'm going to use a completely
different workbook to demonstrate this.
So, this is just a demo workbook.
You see, I've got some very simple data.
I've got a weeks worth of sales
from Sally, May and Anne, and
I've already created a pivot
table showing the total sales.
If I add day of the week to that pivot,
you see it's sorts Monday to Sunday,
which at first glance makes sense.
But that's not alphabetical.
So, how did Excel know to
sort in that sequence?
Well, the answer is it's
used a custom list.
If you haven't heard the term custom list
before, when I type Monday into a cell and
drag down, it automatically
gives me the days of the week.
And the same works for months of the year,
and that is called a custom list.
To locate the custom lists,
you need to come to file, come to options,
select Advanced, and
if you scroll right down to the bottom,
you'll see a button Edit custom lists.
These are the custom lists
that come standard with Excel.
But there's nothing to stop you
creating your own, and if you do,
pivot tables will automatically
sort using that custom list.
Which is really handy, but
it does come with one small caution.
I'm going to cancel out of here,
and click into the Pivot table.
I'm going to remove the day, and instead,
I'm going to sort by salesperson.
And something very odd has happened.
That is definitely not alphabetical,
and if I click somewhere in there,
and click the A to Z,
it's still not alphabetical.
Now, why is that?
Well, the reason is this may isn't just
a girls name, it's also a month name.
See, for people called Jan or
April or May,
they are automatically going
to sort at the top of the list
because Excel will favor the custom
lists over any other data.
So, in rare situations,
you may find you need to turn them off.
Let's see how to do that.
So, in your pivot table,
you can come to options in the ribbon or
you can just right click, and
choose Pivot table options and
on the total Filters tab,
you'll see there's an option.
Use custom lists when sorting.
Now what we're going to
do is turn that off.
So there's our sought
without the custom list.
So quite a lot of options
we've looked at in this video.
Remember on your PivotTable analyze,
your group selection will allow you to
group fields for dates and numbers.
Or group selection for
your specific groups.
And on your data tab,
you can use a variety of sort options.
Or you can use a custom list.
In the next video, we are going to
look at filtering data in our pivots.